From the New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> When the Mexican military captured
[music] and killed the country's top
drug lord, it revealed how much
President Trump's growing pressure
[music] is forcing the country to take
on the cartels.
Today, my colleagues Maria Abi-Habib and
Jack Nicas on the operation [music] to
take down that drug lord, El Mencho,
and whether Mexico has what it takes to
win a war on some of the most powerful
criminals in the [music] world.
It's Thursday, February 26th. [music]
Maria, Jack, wonderful to have you
both on the show, three
Mexico City bureau chiefs. I'm sitting
in your old office, Natalie. Jack,
current, Maria, former, Natalie, former.
We all were in Latin America as
correspondents together. Maria, you and
I both covered the cartels at the same
time and did some intense reporting on
that. To put it lightly.
So, we have you here because the news
that Mexico had taken out El Mencho, the
head of the Jalisco cartel, was massive,
and we've learned in the days since that
the Trump administration played a big
part in that. So, level set for us. Why
is the takedown of this one cartel
leader such a big deal?
Well, El Mencho was arguably the single
biggest criminal in the world. He was
arguably the most wanted man in the
world. He led the biggest cartel in
Mexico. He led the biggest cartel
perhaps in the world, and I know we tend
to avoid using superlatives, but it's
hard to overstate the importance and
significance of this figure in the
criminal world. And it's a really big
deal that the Mexican government went
after him because
he had been on the run for two decades.
He has ties to government figures around
the Mexican government. And this is 4
months just before the World Cup
arrives, just a few hours from where he
was found.
>> Right. And
this is a major move that could open a
new chapter of violence in Mexico.
Yeah, I also think that at this point
this is a huge test for the Mexican
government. They have never been tested
like this. And the last time they tried
to really take on a domestic threat like
this was about 15 years ago, but that
was a different cartel, which was not
nearly as big, did not nearly have the
geographical reach or the penchant for
brutality that Jalisco cartel has. So,
we're going to be seeing Mexico's
security forces tested in a way that
we've never seen before. So, let's see
what happens. Okay, let's talk about El
Mencho, this cartel leader. I think for
a lot of listeners he wasn't a household
name. So, lay out for me how El Mencho
got to be the most wanted man in the
world.
Well, he was born into poverty in the
state of Michoacán, which is in the
west. He has five brothers. He grew up
kind of growing avocados, which is one
of the livelihoods of Michoacán. A lot
of the
avocados that Americans make guacamole
from come from that state. He dropped
out of primary school, I think about
fifth grade, to work in the fields.
And then by the time he was a teenager,
he started to guard marijuana
plantations, apparently.
>> Hmm.
And then he decided that he wanted to
immigrate to California. So, he did so
in the 1980s. Apparently, he said he
wanted a better life.
So, he moves up to San Francisco, the
Bay Area, and he ends up falling back
into crime.
And he gets arrested by the police up
there. He's about 20 at this point, and
he ends up getting deported. But, like
the savant that he is, he decides that
he's going to start changing names, and
he starts crisscrossing the US-Mexico
border. Every time he's arrested, he
gets thrown back into Mexico. He comes
back.
By 1992, he's arrested one last time at
this point in Sacramento, California,
and he's arrested because he and his
brother are carrying out a heroin deal.
And he spends 3 years in prison. And so,
at this point, he's deported again to
Mexico, and he's in his 30s, and he
joins the local police. Wow. Yes.
>> Former drug dealer becomes a police
officer. Kind of a wild career switch.
You know, it happens more than you would
think in Mexico because you have to
remember that Mexico has corruption
problems, specifically within the
police.
Okay, so he becomes a police officer in
a police force that is notoriously
corrupt. What happens?
Well, so he kind of realizes that, well,
everybody else is on the take, and I'd
be a sucker not to be on the take.
So, he switches over, and he joins the
Millennium Cartel, which at this point
is very, very strong in the country's
southwest. And strategically, he
realizes the way to really rise up the
ranks of this cartel is to marry one of
the leader's daughters.
>> Hmm. So, it's a Romeo and Juliet story,
but filled with heroin and meth and
everything in between.
Sure, a classic.
>> Yeah.
And so, he rises through the ranks. And
then, in 2008 and 2009, government
security forces end up arresting or
killing a bunch of leaders from the
Milenio Cartel.
This is in the midst of the last time
the Mexican government did a really
serious push to dismantle the cartels, a
war on these cartels.
>> Exactly. And it sets off this extremely
bloody, brutal leadership fight for who
becomes the head honcho of Milenio
Cartel.
And through sheer brute force and his
ability to really embrace some of the
most disgusting, gruesome, brutal acts,
who rises and ends up being on top?
Well, it's El Mencho.
>> [music]
>> And he spins off his forces to form an
independent cartel, which is the Jalisco
New Generation Cartel. Emphasis on
generation, because this is a long-term
project. He's in it for the long haul.
>> [music]
>> And what is the defining feature of this
new group he's leading, the Jalisco
Cartel?
It's his ability to or want and desire
to really just
be as brutal as absolutely possible.
So, for instance, there were reports
that his new recruits, he really needed
these people to show that they would be
as compliant as foot soldiers as they
possibly could be, and that they were
also willing to
implement
the levels of violence that he himself
favored. So, for instance, there were
reports of cannibalism. You're a
recruit, and guess what? You've got to
eat somebody.
Somebody who had betrayed the cartel.
So, El Mencho becomes a kind of pioneer
in this much more aggressive, violent
way of doing business. And when I was in
Mexico, it was also clear that part of
his signature was also diversifying the
purpose of that violence, right? He
pursued a broad range of business
opportunities that went beyond just
drugs.
Oh, for sure.
He wants the Jalisco cartel to have a
finger in every pie. So, avocados
obviously something he knows very well
from his days picking them when he was a
kid. Guess what? If you're an avocado
grower, you have to either pick avocados
for his cartel or you have to give a
piece of whatever you harvest that year
to him. And then he expands his empire
and it becomes more of like a
conglomerate. He's not just doing drugs.
He's in the hotel industry. They start
bilking, you know, senior citizens from
the United States to Canada from their
time shares. And also they're now
involved in illegal gold mining
throughout South America, which is
laying ravaged to rainforests across
that continent. I think one visual way
to see the different approach of the
Jalisco cartel is the map of Mexico,
particularly when it's overlaid with the
different cartels control. And what you
see is the Jalisco cartel really has
presence across the country and it
really has conquered almost every state
it has presence in. And there is
widespread corruption within the states
and local governments across their
region to make sure that Jalisco can do
what it wants without any questions.
Just talk about that, the extent of the
corruption and what this group can do.
It becomes incredibly powerful, right?
And rich. So, that gives them resources
to do this kind of work. It gives them
resources. It's natural for us to make
the analogy that these guys are a
Fortune 500 company with a diverse set
of businesses, no question. They are
also in a way a state actor. They have
their tentacles in the state governments
and in the local governments across the
country and that allows them to really
operate unbridled. And it even means
that when a hurricane hits, sometimes
the Jalisco Cartel are the ones
providing aid because they want to
generate, you know, some good will with
constituents. So, I think it's really
difficult to understand the importance
of the cartels to the economy but also
to the society. They are a fact of daily
life in Mexico.
Okay, given what you've both laid out
about the steady and menacing rise of
this group and their power across
Mexico, I think a lot of people are
going to be wondering at this point,
what was the government doing this whole
time that this was happening? Were they
going after the Jalisco Cartel and El
Mencho? What was their response?
Well, a lot of Mexicans are wondering
that as well. This certainly was
a a rise that wasn't just, you know, a
single year. This is something that
played out over 15 or more years. The
reality is El Mencho was very elusive.
He basically, you know, according to a
senior government official I just spoke
to, he really basically just used human
messengers. He was not on the phone, he
did not use radio, he was extremely
disciplined and as a result, that
allowed him to elude capture for so
long. Um but it wasn't like they didn't
almost catch him a few times. So, in
2012, they did go after him but his
followers, you know, his his gunmen
basically robbed a bunch of cars and
they set them on fire and set up these
roadblocks across the city and that
allowed El Mencho to escape. In 2015,
they also nearly caught El Mencho but
his gunmen literally shot down a Mexican
military helicopter killing three
soldiers and he got away then as well.
But over the past decade, there really
haven't been many close calls and I
think that raises the question of why
not. I think that is in part because of
incompetence by the Mexican authorities,
but it is also in part because of
complicity. As we noted, this cartel had
tentacles in governments across the
nation, and that complicates that effort
when you've got policemen and
politicians tipping them off. Yeah, it
also should be said that a lot of these
attempts to kill El Mencho were with the
United States killer capture, really.
And, you know, several American law
enforcement had said to to me and others
and on our team
that
A, it was very difficult to catch him
because he was just that good. And then
B, there was also this complicity with
the uh Mexican government to an extent
where sometimes
they were just tipped off and he was
able to scurry away.
So, it's both difficult for the Mexican
government to fend off the pull of this
multi-billion dollar corporation, which
is the Jalisco Cartel, and at the same
time, there's been a hesitancy or
reluctance to go at them head-on because
it means going up against a whole system
that perpetuates their power.
Right, and I think that's precisely why
the cartels have become such an
intractable problem for Mexico.
And
it's what makes it even more shocking
that the Mexican government was able to
go up against El Mencho this time and
actually get him. So, Jack, walk me
through how that operation went down.
So, what we know is that on Sunday
morning, Mexican special forces and the
Mexican army raided a rental home in a
wooded picturesque ranch town about 2
hours south of Guadalajara
uh in Jalisco. And they were backed by
six military helicopters, and they got
into uh a very intense firefight uh with
El Mencho and his men.
Mencho slipped out the back and tried to
escape with at least two bodyguards.
Eventually, Mexican forces then found
him hiding in the brush.
They continued to engage in crossfire
with Mencho and his bodyguards.
They shot Mencho and his bodyguards. Uh
they were mortally wounded. They then
put El Mencho and his two other
bodyguards on a helicopter for air
transport to a hospital. And on the way,
we are told they died. [music]
And that was it. It was certainly
bloody. It was certainly violent, but
government officials actually told me
that it was better than they expected.
>> [music]
>> And Jack, what do we know about the
intelligence that led the operation to
be successful in this case? Well, as we
noted, El Mencho was an incredibly
elusive figure because he was incredibly
disciplined. Right.
>> However, it appears that he got a little
sloppy. Mhm. Uh the Mexican government
says that they identified a a
quote-unquote close associate of a woman
uh who was one of El Mencho's lovers.
And they watched this man drop uh this
woman off at the home where El Mencho
was staying. And at that point, they
were somehow able to confirm that El
Mencho was home. Amazing. They got him
by following his girlfriend. Yes, it
came down to his lover. But it also
appears that there was important
information coming from the CIA. There
was no American boots on the ground.
This was a Mexican law enforcement
operation. But some of the intelligence
that fed it came from the United States.
Got it.
And once El Mencho's death is confirmed,
we saw the country erupt in flames as
the cartel is responding on the streets.
Cartel members loyal to El Mencho, we
understand, were lighting things on
fire, blocking roads. We heard of
American tourists kind of sheltering in
place in their hotels. Just describe
what we were seeing in Mexico.
This was uh really a day of mayhem.
Massive plumes of smoke darkened the
skies of seaside resort towns and
tourist hotspots, but locals are the
most threatened. And it was one of the
biggest shows of force and violence by a
cartel in recent Mexican history. We
were actually terrified and we saw the
people running down the streets, running
from the flames and stuff in the fire
and
And it actually showed the breadth of
the organization that El Mencho had
built because it wasn't just in Jalisco,
but it was from coast to coast in at
least 20 states across the nation. There
was, you know, cars on fire, blocked
roads, banks on fire, supermarkets on
fire.
And also shootings. Uh you know, there
was at least 25 members of the National
Guard who were killed uh as part of some
of this mayhem on Sunday. And that was,
I think, an explosion of of rage and
also power from this Jalisco cartel. But
it also was a short burst of violence.
Uh you know,
after Sunday, things really have calmed
down and you know, by midweek, the
Mexican government says, you know, all
roads are clear, all the fires are put
out, and um and there really are no
shelter-in-place orders uh to speak of.
And so, Mexico is kind of back to
normal.
Right. And now the question seems to be
what happens next. Does the government
decide to keep pushing on an offensive
against the Jalisco cartel given the
stakes
and the pressure the government is under
from the United States, from the Trump
administration?
That's exactly the question because
while things are back to normal, the
country is still very much on edge
because Trump is still pressuring the
Mexican government to do more and you
just suddenly have a beheaded cartel
that may now be fighting for territory
and power.
We'll be right [music] back.
>> [music]
>> Maria and Jack, I think one of the
biggest questions hanging over all this
is just given how long this cartel's
power has been steadily expanding and
how well known the problem of it has
been,
why did the Mexican government do this
at this moment? Why now?
For one, the Mexican authorities had a
piece of very actionable intelligence
and so an opportunity was created and
they took advantage of it. But this also
comes amid the backdrop of a very
aggressive offensive against the cartels
by President Sheinbaum. She basically
has made clear that she wants to take a
very different tact from her predecessor
to go after the cartels and then there
also is one other major difference and
that is Donald J. Trump. What we have in
Mexico right now is a sustained pressure
campaign from the White House to do more
against the cartels. He does not want
any more of the same excuses. He is
saying the Mexican government must solve
its cartel problems or the US military
will do it and that has meant repeated
and public threats of a unilateral US
military strike against the cartels
which President Sheinbaum has said is a
red line that cannot be crossed and so
instead what we're seeing is the Mexican
government doing everything it can to
show it can handle the problem itself.
Right and just say how the threat of the
US military coming in and doing a strike
in Mexico is perceived in the country
and by the government specifically.
>> [sighs]
>> Well, you have to remember that
California used to be Mexico. The
history between these two countries is
not always been so rosy. And so there is
not a lot of eagerness for the US
military to come in with Hellfire
missiles and basically try to attack the
cartels that way because A, there's
concerns about sovereignty and B,
there's concerns about collateral damage
and the number of civilians that can be
killed.
So therefore there is a real unease with
what Trump is threatening and there also
is a real commitment by the Mexican
government now to try to show that it
can handle the problem itself.
>> [snorts]
>> And it should be said, this isn't just
an idle threat that Trump is making at
this point, right? This is a president
who has literally just gone into
Venezuela and ousted the president by
force with a military operation. So it
feels like what the Mexican government
is dealing with at this point isn't just
rhetoric. It's actually a real
possibility. Oh, yes. Apparently from
somebody I speak to who's in touch with
her inner circle, it's what keeps
President Sheinbaum up at night. Like
she knows that this could very well be
the end of her popular support and her
party, the Morena party, is filled with
sharks. And so if there is some sort of
a US unilateral action, that could very
well spell the end of her power within
that party.
So we have this picture of a Mexican
president, Claudia Sheinbaum, who's
under immense pressure to take action.
But at the same time, she is someone
who, as you've said, has already seemed
to be more willing to confront the
cartels than other Mexican leaders. And
so I wonder whether it's possible that
the pressure from Trump actually may in
a sense be giving her political cover to
do what she may want to do anyway. Like,
maybe she would have faced some
resistance
from all these politicians who are in
bed with the cartels. Now, she can point
to Trump and say, "Look, I have no
choice."
That That is exactly the theory we're
hearing from a lot of folks across
Mexico who who study this that basically
Sheinbaum wanted to go after the
cartels, but going after the cartels in
Mexico with the political structure that
exists, with the corruption that exists
within the Mexican government from the
federal to the local level, is very
difficult. But, when you have the
president of the United States saying,
"You better do this or we will invade,"
that changes the calculus. She can go
back to her political party and say, "I
don't have any choice. I'm going after
El Mencho." Mhm. So, officials aren't
saying outright that this is giving them
political cover. Even off the record,
they are saying that they're doing this
because it's good for Mexico. But, you
know, when those conversations do go
deeper, and when you speak to more
people, there is really an
acknowledgement that the Trump effect is
real. Jack, you said that the violence
in response to El Mencho's killing died
down quite quickly. And I want to ask
about that because that was actually one
of the most surprising things to me,
that the violent response from the
cartel didn't last longer. And I wonder
if you think it's possible that the
cartel moderated their response to their
leader's death because they worried that
making the country look too out of
control might give Donald Trump an
excuse to intervene,
which would be devastating for them.
Yes, so it was surprising that the
violence died down that quickly, in
large part because we haven't seen it
die down like that in other instances of
the top leaders getting captured or
killed. And so I think your theory is
certainly a valid one because we have
already made clear here that President
Sheinbaum is worried about a strike from
Donald Trump. Let's be clear, the narcos
are also worried.
>> Mhm. You know, our colleague Paulina
Villegas and I just got back from
Sinaloa where we met with multiple
narcos and they were very worried. And
it also they gave the same reason that
the government officials are giving
which is the capture of Mayo Zambada
changed the game for us. They now are
worried themselves that they may be on
the receiving end of a Hellfire missile.
And so that has to be changing the
calculus of the criminal organizations
in Mexico about how they go about their
business, how they carry out revenge
like this, and how they make a scene
because in some ways they're trying to
run a business. When you're trying to
run a business, you kind of need to keep
your head down and sell your drugs.
Given that, let's talk about what this
capture means for the cartel that El
Mencho ran moving forward. What's the
upshot for this multi-billion dollar
organization? How big of a blow is this
for them?
Well, it depends on whether or not the
commanders who were under El Mencho can
agree amongst themselves
a clear, clean path to succession. Often
times the cleanest form of succession is
within the family, but Mencho didn't
have a lot of of kin who could take
over. He has four to five commanders who
could be his successors. If they're
smart, they'll go ahead and name a
successor and agree, but we rarely see
that happen when [clears throat]
the head of a cartel is killed. So, if
the cartel cannibalizes itself from
within because of this internal
leadership, then we could see it
fracture. And when it fractures, that
creates mini wars all over Mexico.
Right, that battle over succession could
play out across the country for months,
if not years. And I think the question
now is how far is the Mexican government
willing to take a war on the cartels?
Yeah, and I think that, you know,
American diplomats who have worked here
will say when the Mexican government
wants to go after these cartels and
other criminal organizations, they can
do it. They are capable. They know how
to do it. So, Mexicans are waiting to
see is this going to be a more sustained
battle to dislodge the cartels from all
these different corners of Mexico and
reassert government authority here or
not. But it is a day-to-day battle. It
is not a one-year project. It is a
10-year project, maybe more.
I want to talk about that 10-year
project, about what it would actually
take to dismantle these groups. Because
you've both said El Mencho, for example,
has plenty of people waiting in the
wings to succeed him. I mean, we have
seen history shows that taking out the
boss of a cartel does not automatically
eliminate the entire organization
underneath him. When I was in Sinaloa, I
talked to cartel leaders who said, "If
you take me out, there's 10 more guys
waiting to take my place." So, what is
the recipe for long-term success here?
For actually, as you said, Maria,
dislodging these groups from the
country.
I think that what we haven't seen from
the Mexican government
is addressing the corruption.
The reality is the only way for this
criminal group to get this powerful and
this big is through the complicity of
officials across the nation. And we
haven't seen that level of political
will yet from President Sheinbaum and
her party to go after the officials who
really actually have already been
pointed to as being corrupt. I mean, one
of the most powerful senators in Mexico
has been directly linked to a cartel.
The former head of the Navy has been
linked to a massive corruption scheme.
And you can go down the list. There are
many other politicians. And this is
actually what we hear the US officials
really asking for is that is when they
will feel there is a sign of real
progress is when the Mexican government
starts to go after the corrupt
politicians that have enabled this to go
on this long.
Given that this is such an intractable
problem, I'm just curious if we know at
what point President Trump is going to
be satisfied with the progress that
Mexico is making. Like, do we know if
this move to take out El Mencho might
have appeased Trump and bought the
Mexican government some time?
I think Trump's goalposts are infinite.
And the strongest evidence of that is
that less than 24 hours after the
Mexican government killed El Mencho,
probably the single biggest achievement
that the government has had in the
cartel war in years,
Trump posted online, quote, "Mexico must
step up their efforts on cartel and
drugs."
And that is, I think, a clear sign that
the demands aren't going to end. And
probably that's the point. And possibly
that's also what is necessary. Because
there are signs that Trump's pressure is
creating a dynamic in Mexico that really
hasn't existed before and perhaps is
creating the environment that is
necessary to finally defeat or at least
really confront these massive powerful
criminal organizations in a way that the
government hasn't. And I think that
there are Mexicans who, while they don't
want a unilateral strike from the US
government, do welcome
Trump's attention to this matter and
pressure on this issue.
You're saying the goal posts moving that
could be seen as a good thing. Like in
one way it's a bait and switch, but in
another that's kind of just how progress
works. Well, it could be a good thing,
but I think it depends on how far it
goes.
If Trump is just putting consistent
pressure on and that is
enabling and forcing the Mexican
government to do what it needs to do to
take control of the cartels, I think
many Mexicans agree that is a great
thing.
However, if Trump ultimately says
[music] you didn't do what I want and
now I'm going to bomb you, well, I think
that's a whole 'nother story because
that is going to destabilize the
government, inflame the situation, and
really throw us into the unknown.
>> [music]
>> Well, Jack, Maria, thank you both so
much. Thank you, Natalie. We miss you
here in Mexico. Thanks so much for
having us.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
The files released by the Justice
Department from its investigations into
Jeffrey [music] Epstein did not include
key materials related to a woman who
made an accusation [music] against
President Trump, according to a review
by The New York Times.
Those missing materials are FBI memos
summarizing the interviews that the
bureau did in connection [music] with
claims made in 2019 by the woman who
said she'd been sexually assaulted by
Trump and Epstein decades earlier when
she was a minor.
An index that was publicly released
indicates that the FBI did four
interviews related to her claims [music]
and wrote summaries about each of them.
Only one of the summaries was released
though.
Officials haven't said why these files
weren't released, but the Justice
Department has told the Times that any
withheld files were either privileged
[music] or duplicates, and that files
may be withheld if they're part of an
ongoing federal investigation. [music]
Trump has repeatedly denied any
wrongdoing.
>> [music]
>> And Dr. Means, the wellness maha
influencer who's President Trump's
nominee to be surgeon general, testified
before the Senate at her confirmation
hearing [music] on Wednesday.
If confirmed, she would carry the title
of the nation's doctor, [music] even
though she doesn't have an active
medical license, and she's a vocal
critic of the medical establishment.
[music]
>> Would you encourage other mothers to
have their children vaccinated against
measles with the MMR vaccine? [music]
During the hearing, Dr. Means said that
vaccines save lives, but she refused to
say whether she would urge parents to
vaccinate their children against the
measles. I'm supportive of vaccination.
Every individual needs to talk to their
doctor before putting a medication in
their body. [music] In one heated
back-and-forth, Dr. Means had a hard
time answering a question from Senator
Tim Kaine of Virginia about whether the
flu vaccine was effective. Do you
believe that there's no evidence that
there's
the flu vaccine has efficacy [music] in
reducing serious injury or
hospitalization?
>> I I
I
This is an easy one, doctor.
This is an easy one. The
Republican-controlled Senate [music]
Health Committee seemed poised to move
Dr. Means' nomination to the Senate
floor.
Today's episode [music]
was produced by Anna Foley and Caitlin
O'Keefe. It was edited [music] by MJ
Davis Lynn with help from Paige Cowett.
Contains music by Elisheba Ittoop, Dan
Powell, and Marion Lozano.
And was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]